Introduction
============

What is FOF?
------------

FOF (Framework on Framework) is a rapid application development
framework for Joomla!. Unlike other frameworks it is not standalone. It
extends the Joomla! Platform instead of replacing it, featuring its own
forked and extended version of the MVC classes, keeping a strong
semblance to the existing Joomla! MVC API. This means that you don't
have to relearn writing Joomla! extensions. Instead, you can start being
productive from the first day you're using it. Our goal is to always
support the officially supported LTS versions of Joomla! and not break
backwards compatibility without a clear deprecation and migration path.

FOF is currently used by Akeeba products such as Akeeba Backup, Admin
Tools, Akeeba Subscriptions, Akeeba Ticket System and Akeeba DocImport
components.

Free Software means collaboration
---------------------------------

The reason of existence of FOSS (Free and Open Source Software) is
collaboration between developers. FOF is no exception; it exists because
and for the community of Joomla! developers. It is provided free of
charge and with all of the freedoms of the GPL for you to benefit. And
in true Free Software spirit, the community aspect is very strong.
Participating is easy and fun.

If you want to discuss FOF there is [a Google Groups mailing
list](https://groups.google.com/forum/?hl=en&fromgroups#!forum/frameworkonframework).
This is a peer discussion group where developers working with FOF can
freely discuss.

If you have a feature proposal or have found a bug, but you're not sure
how to code it yourself, please report it on the list.

If you have a patch feel free to fork [this project on
GitHub](https://github.com/akeeba/fof) (you only need a free account to
do that) and send a pull request. Please remember to describe what you
intended to achieve to help me review your code faster.

If you've found a cool hack (in the benign sense of the word, not the
malicious one...), something missing from the documentation or have a
tip which can help other developers feel free to edit the Wiki. We're
all grown-ups and professionals, I believe there is no need of policing
the wiki edits. If you're unsure about whether a wiki edit is
appropriate, please ask on the list.

Preface to this documentation
-----------------------------

FOF is a rapid application development framework for the Joomla! CMS.
Instead of trying to completely replace Joomla!’s own API (formerly
known as the Joomla! Platform) it builds upon it and extends it both in
scope and features. In the end of the day it enables agony-free
extension development for the Joomla! CMS.

In order to exploit the time-saving capabilities of the FOF framework to
the maximum you need to understand how it's organized, the conventions
used and how its different pieces work together. This documentation
attempts to provide you with this knowledge.

As with every piece of documentation we had to answer two big questions:
where do we start and how do we structure the content. The first
question was easy to answer. Having given the presentation of the FOF
framework countless times we have developed an intuitive grasp of how to
start presenting it: from the abstract to the concrete.

The second question was harder to answer. Do we write a dry reference to
the framework or more of a story-telling documentation which builds up
its reader’s knowledge? Since we are all developers we can read the code
(and DocBlocks), meaning that the first option is redundant. Therefore
we decided to go for the second option.

As a result this documentation does not attempt to be a complete
reference, a development gospel, the one and only source of information
on FOF. On the contrary, this documentation aims to be the beginning of
your journey, much like a travel guide. What matters the most is the
journey itself, writing your own extensions based on FOF. As you go on
writing software you will be full of questions. Most of them you’ll
answer yourself. Some of them will be already answered in the wiki. A
few of them you’ll have to ask on the mailing list. In the end of the
day you will be richer in knowledge. If you do dig up a golden nugget of
knowledge, please do consider writing a wiki page. This way we’ll all be
richer and enjoy our coding trip even more.

Have fun and code on!

Key features
------------

Some of the key features / highlights of FOF:

**Convention over configuration, Rails style**. Instead of having to
painstakingly code every single bit of your component, it's sufficient
to use our naming conventions, inspired by Ruby on Rails conventions.
For example, if you have com\_example, the foobar view will read from
the \#\_\_example\_foobars table which has a unique key named
example\_foobar\_id. The default implementation of controllers, models,
tables and views will also cater for the majority of use cases,
minimising the code you'll need to write.

**HMVC today, without relearning component development**. There's a lot
of talk about the need to re-engineer the MVC classes in Joomla! to
support HMVC. What if we could give you HMVC support using the existing
MVC classes, today, without having to relearn how to write components?
Yes, it's possible with FOF. It has been possible since September 2011,
actually. And for those who mumble their words and spread FUD, yes, it
IS HMVC by any definition. The very existence of the FOFDispatcher class
proves the point.

**Easy reuse of view template files without ugly include()**. More often
than not you want to reuse view template files across views. The
"traditional" way was by using include() or require() statements. This
meant, however, that template overrides ceased working. Not any more!
Using FOFView's loadAnyTemplate() you can load any view template file
from the front- or back-end of your component or any other component,
automatically respecting template overrides.

**Automatic language loading and easy overrides**. Are you sick and
tired of having to load your component's language files manually? Do you
end up with a lot of untranslated strings when your translators don't
catch up with your new features? Yes, that sucks. It's easy to overcome.
FOF will automatically handle language loading for you.

**Media files override (works like template overrides)**. So far you
knew that you can override Joomla!'s view template files using template
overrides. But what about CSS or Javascript files? This usually required
the users to "hack core", i.e. modify your views' PHP files, ending up
in an unmaintainable, non-upgradeable and potentially insecure solution.
Not any more! Using FOF's FOFTemplateUtils::addCSS and
FOFTemplateUtils::addJS you can load your CSS and JS files directly from
the view template file. Even better? You can use the equivalent of
template overrides to let your users and template designers override
them with their own implementations. They just have to create the
directory templates/your\_template/media/com\_example to override the
files normally found in media/com\_example. So easy!

**Automatic JSON and CSV views with no extra code (also useful for web
services)**. Why struggle to provide a remote API for your component?
FOF makes the data of each view accessible as JSON feeds opening a new
world of possibilities for Joomla! components (reuse data in mobile
apps, Metro-style Windows 8 tiles, browser extensions, mash-up web
applications, ...). The automatic CSV views work on the same principle
but output data in CSV format, suitable for painlessly data importing to
spreadsheets for further processing. Oh, did we mention that we already
have an almost RESTful web services implementation?

**No code view templates**. Don't you hate it that you have to write a
different view template (in PHP and HTML) for each Joomla! version and,
worse, each template out there? Don't you hate it having to teach
non-developers how to not screw up your component with every update you
publish? We feel your pain. That's why FOF supports the use of XML files
as view templates, rendering them automatically to HTML. Not just forms;
everything, including browse (multiple items) and single item views.
Even better, you get to choose if you want to use traditional PHP/HTML
view templates, XML view templates or a combination of both, even in the
same view!

**No code routing, ACL and overall application configuration**. Since
FOF 2.1 you can define your application's routing, access control
integration and overall configuration without routing any code, just by
using a simple to understand XML file. It's now easier than ever to have
Joomla! extensions with truly minimal (or no) PHP code.

Getting started with FOF
------------------------

### Download and install FOF

You can download FOF as an installable Joomla! library package from [our
repository](https://www.akeebabackup.com/download/fof.html). You can
install it like any other extension under Joomla! 2.x and later.

**Using the latest development version**

You can clone a read-only copy of the Git repository of FOF in your
local machine. Make sure you symlink or copy the fof directory to your
dev site's libraries/fof directory. Alternatively, we publish dev
releases in the [dev release
repository](https://www.akeebabackup.com/download/fof-dev.html). These
are installable packages but please note that they may be out of date
compared to the Git HEAD. Dev releases are not published automatically
and may be several revisions behind the current Git master branch.

### Using it in your extension

The recommended method for including FOF in your component, module or
plugin is using this short code snippet right after your
defined('\_JEXEC') or die() statement (Joomla! 2.x and later):

    if (!defined('FOF_INCLUDED')) {
        include_once JPATH_LIBRARIES . '/fof/include.php';
    }

Alternatively, you can use the one-liner:

    require_once JPATH_LIBRARIES . '/fof/include.php';

From that point onwards you can use FOF in your extension.

### Installing FOF with your component

Unfortunately, Joomla! doesn't allow us to version checking before
installing a library package. This means that it's your responsibility
to check that there is no newer version of FOF installed in the user's
site before attempting to install FOF with your extension. In the
following paragraphs we are going to demonstrate one way to do that for
Joomla! 2.x / 3.x component packages.

Include a directory called fof in your installation package. The
directory should contain the files of the installation package's fof
directory. Then, in your script.mycomponent.php file add the following
method:

    /**
     * Check if FoF is already installed and install if not
     *
     * @param   object  $parent  class calling this method
     *
     * @return  array            Array with performed actions summary
     */
    private function _installFOF($parent)
    {
        $src = $parent->getParent()->getPath('source');

        // Load dependencies
        JLoader::import('joomla.filesystem.file');
        JLoader::import('joomla.utilities.date');
        $source = $src . '/fof';

        if (!defined('JPATH_LIBRARIES'))
        {
            $target = JPATH_ROOT . '/libraries/fof';
        }
        else
        {
            $target = JPATH_LIBRARIES . '/fof';
        }
        $haveToInstallFOF = false;

        if (!is_dir($target))
        {
            $haveToInstallFOF = true;
        }
        else
        {
            $fofVersion = array();

            if (file_exists($target . '/version.txt'))
            {
                $rawData = JFile::read($target . '/version.txt');
                $info    = explode("\n", $rawData);
                $fofVersion['installed'] = array(
                    'version'   => trim($info[0]),
                    'date'      => new JDate(trim($info[1]))
                );
            }
            else
            {
                $fofVersion['installed'] = array(
                    'version'   => '0.0',
                    'date'      => new JDate('2011-01-01')
                );
            }

            $rawData = JFile::read($source . '/version.txt');
            $info    = explode("\n", $rawData);
            $fofVersion['package'] = array(
                'version'   => trim($info[0]),
                'date'      => new JDate(trim($info[1]))
            );

            $haveToInstallFOF = $fofVersion['package']['date']->toUNIX() > $fofVersion['installed']['date']->toUNIX();
        }

        $installedFOF = false;

        if ($haveToInstallFOF)
        {
            $versionSource = 'package';
            $installer = new JInstaller;
            $installedFOF = $installer->install($source);
        }
        else
        {
            $versionSource = 'installed';
        }

        if (!isset($fofVersion))
        {
            $fofVersion = array();

            if (file_exists($target . '/version.txt'))
            {
                $rawData = JFile::read($target . '/version.txt');
                $info    = explode("\n", $rawData);
                $fofVersion['installed'] = array(
                    'version'   => trim($info[0]),
                    'date'      => new JDate(trim($info[1]))
                );
            }
            else
            {
                $fofVersion['installed'] = array(
                    'version'   => '0.0',
                    'date'      => new JDate('2011-01-01')
                );
            }

            $rawData = JFile::read($source . '/version.txt');
            $info    = explode("\n", $rawData);
            $fofVersion['package'] = array(
                'version'   => trim($info[0]),
                'date'      => new JDate(trim($info[1]))
            );
            $versionSource = 'installed';
        }

        if (!($fofVersion[$versionSource]['date'] instanceof JDate))
        {
            $fofVersion[$versionSource]['date'] = new JDate;
        }

        return array(
            'required'  => $haveToInstallFOF,
            'installed' => $installedFOF,
            'version'   => $fofVersion[$versionSource]['version'],
            'date'      => $fofVersion[$versionSource]['date']->format('Y-m-d'),
        );
    }

You need to call it from inside your postflight() method. For example:

    /**
     * Method to run after an install/update/uninstall method
     *
     * @param   object  $type    type of change (install, update or discover_install)
     * @param   object  $parent  class calling this method
     *
     * @return void
     */
    function postflight($type, $parent)
    {
            $fofInstallationStatus = $this->_installFOF($parent);
    }

> **Important**
>
> Due to a bug/feature in Joomla! 1.6 and later, your component's
> manifest file must start with a letter before L, otherwise Joomla!
> will assume that lib\_fof.xml is your extension's XML manifest and
> install FOF instead of your extension. We suggest using the
> com\_yourComponentName.xml convention, e.g. com\_todo.xml. There is a
> patch pending in Joomla!'s tracker for this issue, hopefully it will
> be accepted sometime soon.

### Sample applications

FOF comes with two sample applications which are used to demonstrate its
features, [To-Do](https://github.com/akeeba/todo-fof-example) and
[Contact Us](https://github.com/akeeba/contactus). These were conceived
and developed in different points of FOF's development. As a result they
are always in a state of flux and will definitely not expose all of
FOF's features.

Another good way to learn some FOF tricks is by reading the source code
of existing FOF-based components. Just remember that we are all real
world developers and sometimes our code is anything but kosher ;)

The big picture
===============

Overview of a component
-----------------------

FOF is an MVC framework in heart and soul. It tries to stick as close as
possible to the MVC conventions put forward by the Joomla! CMS since
Joomla! 1.5, cutting down on unnecessary code duplication. The main
premise is that your code will be DRY – not as the opposite of “wet”,
but as in Don’t Repeat Yourself. Simply put: if you ever find yourself
trying to copy code from a base class and paste it into a specialized
class, you are doing it wrong.

In order to achieve this code isolation, FOF uses a very flexible
structure for your components. A component's structure looks like this:

![](images/component-structure.png)

The Dispatcher is the entry point of your component. Some people would
call this a "front Controller" and this is actually what it is. It's
different than what we typically call a Controller in the sense that the
Dispatcher is the only part of your component which is supposed to
interface the underlying application (e.g. the Joomla! CMS) and gets to
decide which Controller and task to execute based on the input data
(usually this is the request data). No matter if you call it an entry
point, front controller, dispatcher or Clint Eastwood its job is to
figure out what needs to run and run it. We simply chose the name
"Dispatcher" because, like all conventions, we had to call it something.
So, basically, the Dispatcher will take a look at the input data, figure
out which Controller and task to run, create an instance of it, push it
the data and tell it to run the task. The Controller is expected to
return the rendered data or a redirection which the Dispatcher will
dully pass back to its caller.

Oh, wait, what is a Controller anyway?! Right below the Dispatcher you
will see a bunch of stuff grouped as a "triad". The "triad" is commonly
called "view" (with a lowercase v). Each triad does something different
in your component. For example, one triad may allow you to handle
clients, another triad allow you to handle orders and so on. Your
component can have one or more triads. A triad usually contains a
Controller, a Model and a View, hence the name ("triad" literally means
"a bunch of three things"). The only mandatory member is the Controller.
A triad may be reusing the Model and View from another triad – which is
another reason why DRY code rocks– or it may even be view-less. So, a
triad may actually be a bunch of one, two or three things, as long as it
includes a Controller. Just to stop you from being confused or thinking
about oriental organised crime and generally make your life easier we
decided to call these "views" (with a lowercase v) instead of "triads".
See? Now it is so much better.

FOF views follow the "fat Model - thin Controller" paradigm. This means
that the Controller is a generally minimalist piece of code and the
Model is what gets to do all the work. Knowing this very important bit
of information, let's take a look at the innards of a view.

In the very beginning we have the Controller. The Controller has one or
more tasks. Each task is an action of your component, like showing a
list of records, showing a single record, publish a record, delete a
record and so on. With a small difference. The Controller's tasks do not
perform the actual work. They simply spawn an instance of the Model and
push it the necessary data it needs. This is called "setting the state"
of the Model. In most cases the Controller will also call a Model's
method which does something. It's extremely important to note that the
Controller will work with *any* Model that implements that method and
that the Model is oblivious to the Controller. Then the Controller will
create an instance of the View class, pass it the instance of the Model
and tell it to go render itself. It will take the output of the View and
pass it back to the Dispatcher.

Which brings us to the Model. The Model is the workhorse of the view. It
implements the business logic. All FOF Models are passive Models which
means that they are oblivious to the presence of the Controller and
View. Actually, they are completely oblivious to the fact that they are
part of a triad. That's right, Models can be used standalone, outside
the context of the view or component they are designed to live in. The
Model's methods will act upon the state variables which have already
been set (typically, by the Controller) and will only modify the state
variables or return the output directly. Models must never have to deal
with input data directly or talk to specific Controllers and/or Views.
Models are decoupled from everything, that's where their power lies.

Just a small interlude here. Right below the Model we see a small thing
called a "Table". This is a strange beast. It's one part data adapter,
one part model and one part controller, but nothing quite like any of
this. The Table is used to create an object representing a single
record. It is typically used to check the validity of a record before
saving it to the database and post-process a record when reading it from
the database (e.g. unserialise a field which contains serialised or JSON
data).

The final piece of our view is the View class itself. It will ask the
Model for the raw data and transform it into a suitable representation.
Typically this means getting the raw records from the Model and create
the HTML output, but that's not the only use for a View. A View could
just as well render the data as a JSON stream, a CSV file, or even
produce a graphic, audio or video file. It's what transforms the raw
data into something useful, i.e. it's your presentation layer. Most
often it will do so by loading view templates which are .php files which
transform raw data to a suitable representation. If you are using the
XML forms feature of FOF, the View will ask the Model to return the form
definition and ask FOF's renderer to render this to HTML instead. Even
though the actual rendering is delegated to the Renderer (not depicted
above), it's still the View that's responsible for the final leg of the
rendered data: passing it back to its caller. Yes, the View will
actually neither output its data directly to the browser, nor talk to
the underlying application. It returns the raw data back to its caller,
which is almost always the Controller. Again, we have to stress that the
View is oblivious to both the Controller and the Model being used. A
properly written View is fully decoupled from everything else and will
work with any data provider object implementing the same interface as a
Model object and a caller which is supposed to capture its output for
further consumption.

> **Important**
>
> All classes comprising a view are fully decoupled. None is aware of
> the internal workings of another object in the same or a different
> view. This allows you to exchange objects at will, promoting code
> reuse. Even though it sounds like a lot of work it's actually less
> work and pays dividends the more features you get to add to your
> components.

There's another bit mentioned below the triad, the Toolbar. The Toolbar
is something which conceptually belongs to the component and only has to
do with views being rendered as HTML. It's what renders the title in the
back-end, the actions toolbar in the front- or back-end and the
navigation links / menu in the back-end. In case you missed the subtle
reference: FOFToolbar allows you to render an actions toolbar even in
the front-end of your component, something that's not possible with
plain old Joomla!. You will simply need to add some CSS to do it.

Finally we mention the Helpers. The Helpers are pure static classes
implementing every bit of functionality that's neither OOP, nor can it
be categorised in any other object already mentioned. For example,
methods to render drop-down selection lists. In so many words, "Helper"
is a polite way of saying "non-OOP cruft we'd rather not talk about".
Keep your Helpers to a minimum as they're a royal pain in the rear to
test.

Please do keep in mind that this is just a generic overview of how an
FOF-based component works. The real power comes from the fact that you
don't need to know the internal workings of FOF to use it, you don't
need to copy and paste code from it (woe is the developer who does that)
and quite possibly you don't even need to write any code. At all. It's
all discussed later on.

Diving into the FOF classes
---------------------------

As it was casually mentioned in the previous section, the real power of
FOF comes from the fact that it doesn't require you to write much or any
code. All you have to do is to follow some conventions and understand
what are the default actions carried out by FOF. This sections attempts
to explain it all, one class at a time.

### FOFDispatcher

**Instantiating and using the Dispatcher**

Following Joomla conventions, at the root of both the front- and
back-end of an extension is the entry point for that end of the
extension, named following the extension’s name.

For example, for com\_foobar, we would create foobar.php in the root of
each end. These files are not dispatchers, but they are the points in
the extension that include the FOF library, and create an instance of
FOF's dispatcher.

FOF is included with:

    // Load FOF
    include_once JPATH_LIBRARIES . '/fof/include.php';
    if (!defined('FOF_INCLUDED')) {
        JError::raiseError('500', 'FOF is not installed');
    }

Creating an instance of FOF's dispatcher for com\_foobar would be done
with:

    FOFDispatcher::getTmpInstance('com_foobar')->dispatch();

**What FOFDispatcher does**

FOFDispatcher's main concern is routing your component. It takes a look
at the input data and decides which Controller to instantiate and, if
there is no task, figure out which task you meant to use. Even though
it's commonly used with the request data, it can also operate on
arbitrary input data passed to it through the `$config['input']`
variable. This variable can be a simple hash array (array of key/value
pairs) or a FOFInput object. In any case it will be converted to a
FOFInput object and passed on to the other classes (Controller, Model,
Table, View) *by reference* so that they all operate on the same set of
data.

**Convention over Configuration**

The first thing you should know about is the naming convention used. All
Dispatchers are named after the component (without the com\_ prefix) and
the word Dispatcher. For example, com\_foobar's dispatcher is called
FoobarDispatcher. If you do not provide a specialised dispatcher class,
FOF will provide you with an automatically generated one.

You should be aware how the view (therefore the Controller) to be used
is selected when there is no view parameter defined in the input data.
FOF will use the `defaultView` variable which, by default, contains the
value `cpanel`. If you have defined a `default_view` parameter in
`fof.xml` it will use that value instead.

Another thing you should know is how the task is selected when you don't
specify one. Following the RESTful conventions, the task is chosen based
on the view name and HTTP verb used in the request. The following
possibilities are:

-   a DELETE request calls the delete task, deleting a record.

-   a POST or PUT request will issue the save task, saving or creating a
    record. Due to the poor support of the PUT HTTP verb in PHP we chose
    to map it to POST. If a new record is created, FOF will by default
    return a 201 Created HTTP header, whereas when a record is updated
    it will return a 200 OK HTTP header.

-   a GET request to a plural view (e.g. items) results in the browse
    task being called

-   a GET request to a singular view (e.g item) in the back-end results
    in the edit task being called, as long as you have a non-empty,
    non-zero input variable called id.

-   a GET request to a singular view (e.g item) in the front-end results
    in the read task being called, as long as you have a non-empty,
    non-zero input variable called id.

-   a GET request to a singular view (e.g item) in the front-end results
    in the add task being called, as long as you have an empty or zero
    input variable called id or if you skip it entirely.

Though technically not part of the Dispatcher, the view class to be
instantiated is also defined by the format input parameter. If none is
defined, `html` is assumed, creating an instance of FOFViewHtml. FOF
automatically supports two more formats you should know about, `json`
and `csv`.

**Specialising FOFDispatcher**

Create a file named `dispatcher.php` in your component's base directory.
There is a different dispatcher for the front- and back-end section of
your component.

See the methods below for more information about what you can do.

**FOFDispatcher methods you should know about**

public static function &getTmpInstance(\$option = null, \$view = null,
\$config = array())

Return an instance of a dispatcher object. The parameters are:

\$option
:   Required. The name of the component, e.g. com\_example.

\$view
:   Optional. Which view to instantiate. Use null to let the Dispatcher
    decide.

\$config
:   Optional. The array of configuration variables, discussed in the
    next chapter of this documentation.

public function onBeforeDispatch()

Runs before the dispatcher routes anything. Return true to allow the
dispatcher to run. Return false to have the dispatcher raise an
exception with code 403, usually resulting in a 403 Forbidden HTTP
header being emitted.

public function onBeforeDispatchCLI()
Runs before the dispatcher routes anything when running under the CLI.
Return true to allow the dispatcher to run. Return false to have the
dispatcher raise an exception with code 403, usually resulting in a 403
Forbidden HTTP header being emitted.

public function onAfterDispatch()
Runs after the dispatcher routes everything and before returning control
to the caller. Return true to allow the dispatcher to complete running.
Return false to have the dispatcher raise an exception with code 403,
usually resulting in a 403 Forbidden HTTP header being emitted.

public static function isCliAdmin()

Returns an array with two boolean values. The first one is true if the
component is running under CLI mode. The second one is true if the
component is running under the Joomla! administrator. This is used
throughout FOF to determine whether the component is running inside the
Joomla! front-end, back-end or a CLI app.

#### Calling a Dispatcher from anywhere (a.k.a. HMVC)

You can call a dispatcher from anywhere in Joomla! and let it run the
component, rendering itself. This is useful in master/detail views,
creating modules rendering a component's view, plugins injecting a
component's view to an article... The possibilities are endless.

The main concept is that you need to instantiate the Dispatcher with the
data you need and tell it to Dispatch itself. Typically, this can be
accomplished like this:

    $config = array(
      'input' => array(
        'option' => 'com_example',
        'view' => 'items',
        'layout' => 'funky',
        'limit' => 10,
        'limitstart' => 42,
      )
    );
    FOFDispatcher::getTmpInstance('com_example', 'items', $config)->dispatch();

Do note that it's always a good idea to put the last line inside a
try/catch block, unless you really want to let a possible exception
bubble up to the application.

#### Web services

FOF is currently offering web services, but it's not entirely RESTful
(it lacks hypermedia support). Based on what you have already learned
you probably realised that you can use the HTTP verb, and the view and
format input variables to address everything through web services. For
example, something like
http://www.example.com/index.php?option=com\_example&view=items&format=json
would return a nice JSON-encoded (and paginated) list of records in the
\#\_\_example\_items table. Without writing any code. Not bad, huh?

This is all fine and dandy, but what about the need to authenticate the
user before accessing data? Let's say that we have a doctor's website
with an FOF-based component handling his appointments. We don't want
everyone to see all patients' information but we'd definitely want the
doctor to do so and each patient to have access to her own appointments.
We can easily build that feature in our component using the Model's
post-processing feature (more on that later), but in the end of the day
we need to have a logged in user to figure out who can see what.

Joomla! has a bad habit, like all web apps: it normally needs cookies to
know if you're logged in or not. This isn't a very good idea. In order
to pull your appointments you'd need at least three HTTP requests: one
to get the login form (and the all-necessary form token), one to login
(and get your session cookie) and one to pull the information. Never
mind it's not a RESTful approach, this is an utter hassle to begin with!
There has to be a better way. And there is.

FOF supports five different transparent authentication methods:

-   HTTP Basic Authentication using a username and password pair in
    plain text (a bad idea unless you're using HTTPS)

-   Plaintext, JSON-encoded username and password pair passed in the
    \_fofauthentication query string parameter (a bad idea unless you're
    using HTTPS)

-   Plaintext username and password in the \_fofauthentication\_username
    and \_fofauthentication\_username query string parameters (a bad
    idea unless you're using HTTPS)

-   Encrypted information protected with a TOTP passed in the
    \_fofauthentication query string parameter

-   HTTP Basic Authentication using encrypted information protected with
    a TOTP (the username must be "\_fof\_auth")

FIrst, what does "transparent" mean? Once the Dispatcher sees any of
this data and as long as the corresponding authentication method is
enabled it will try to log you in. If it succeeds, Joomla! now knows you
are logged in without sending you a cookie. The Dispatcher will then
happily route your component and just before it returns it will log you
out. You are being logged in and out of the Joomla! site transparently,
without the remote end having to know that the web service is
implemented using Joomla! and without having to mess around with
cookies. You're welcome!

Now, you might be wondering, what the heck is a TOTP and why is it a
good thing to have? TOTP stands for Time-based One Time Password. It's
the same stuff Google uses in its two-step authentication. Both parties
(the component and the remote client) know a secret key. With this key
and the current date a time a unique six digit password is created,
called a TOTP. This is used, together with some admittedly weakly
implemented AES-128 cryptography, to encrypt your username and password.
FOFDispatcher will decode it using the TOTP it generates itself.
Therefore even though a symmetrical encryption algorithm is used, the
encryption key is not exchanged between the two parties during the
request. The actual secret key can be made known to the remote client
through a secure channel – just think about how Google had you set up
Google Authenticator on your phone.

I know what you're thinking. Replay attacks. What if an attacker sits
between the FOF component and the remote client? The truth is that they
can't accomplish much, for two reasons. First it's the ephemeral nature
of a TOTP. It is only valid for a limited amount of time, 6 seconds by
default. The attacker needs to be really darn fast – not that it's hard
in the age of the WiFi Pineapple. I know, I know, 6 seconds is plenty
for a fast attacker to get back the data we fetched. How do we protect
it? If you use the encrypted authentication method all of your data is
automatically encrypted using the same key. Without the key, the data is
garbled. This is enough to deter simple attacks but of course won't hold
up a lot against a determined and resourceful opponent. Use HTTPS
instead. This kind of encryption implemented in FOF is designed as a
poor man's substitute for proper encryption, not a drop-in replacement.

@TODO Example of encrypted authentication

### FOFController

**What FOFController does**

**Convention over Configuration**

**Specialising FOFController**

**FOFController methods you should know about**

### FOFModel

**What FOFModel does**

**Convention over Configuration**

**Specialising FOFModel**

**FOFModel methods you should know about**

### FOFTable

**What FOFTable does**

**Convention over Configuration**

**Specialising FOFTable**

**FOFTable methods you should know about**

### FOFView

**What FOFView does**

**Convention over Configuration**

**Specialising FOFView**

**FOFView methods you should know about**

#### FOFView subclasses

#### View templates

**Naming of view template files**

**Including media files**

**Reusing view templates**

#### Template overrides

**Overriding view templates**

**Overriding media files**

### FOFToolbar

**What FOFToolbar does**

**Convention over Configuration**

**Specialising FOFToolbar**

**FOFToolbar methods you should know about**

XML Forms
=========

The different form types
------------------------

### Browse forms

### Read forms

### Edit forms

Header field types reference
----------------------------

### accesslevel

### field

### fieldsearchable

### fieldselectable

### fieldsql

### filtersearchable

### filterselectable

### filtersql

### language

### ordering

### published

### rowselect

Form field types reference
--------------------------

### accesslevel

### button

### cachehandler

### calendar

### captcha

### checkbox

### editor

### email

### groupedlist

### hidden

### image

### imagelist

### integer

### language

### list

### media

### model

### ordering

### password

### plugins

### published

### radio

### selectrow

### sessionhandler

### spacer

### sql

### tel

### text

### textarea

### timezone

### url

### user

Configuring the MVC and associated classes
==========================================

All MVC and associated classes in FOF (Dispatcher, Controller, Model,
View, Table, Toolbar) come with a default behavior, for example where to
look for model files, how to handle request data and so on. While this
is fine most of the times –as long as you follow FOF’s conventions– this
is not always desirable.

For example, if you are building a CCK (something like K2) you may want
to look for view templates in a non-standard directory in order to
support alternative “themes”. Or, maybe, if you're building a contact
component you only want to expose the add view to your front-end users
so that they can file a contact request but not view other people's
contact requests. You get the idea.

The traditional approach to development prescribes overriding classes,
even to the extent of copying and pasting code. If you've ever attended
one of my presentations you've probably figured that I consider copying
and pasting code a mortal sin. You may have also figured that, like all
developers, I am lazy and dislike writing lots of code. Naturally, FOF
being a RAD tool it provides an elegant solution to this problem. The
`$config` array and its sibling, the `fof.xml` file.

What is the `$config` array?
----------------------------

You may have observed that FOF’s MVC classes can be passed an optional
array parameter `$config`. This is a hash array with configuration
options. It is being passed from the Dispatcher to the Controller and
from there to the Model, View and Table classes. Essentially, this is
your view (MVC triad) configuration. Setting its options allows you to
modify FOF’s internal workings without writing code.

The various possible settings are explained in “The configuration
settings” section below.

What’s the deal with the `fof.xml` file?
----------------------------------------

The `$config` array is a great idea but has a major drawback: you have
to create one or several `.php` files with specialized classes to use
it. Remember the FOF promise about not having to write code unless
absolutely necessary? Yep, this doesn’t stick very well with that
promise. So the `fof.xml` file was born in FOF 2.1.

The `fof.xml` file is a simple XML file placed inside your component's
**back-end** directory, e.g. `administrator/com_example/fof.xml`. It
contains configuration overrides for the front-end, back-end and CLI
parts of your FOF component.

### A sample `fof.xml` file

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <fof>
        <!-- Component back-end options -->
        <backend>
            <!-- Dispatcher options -->
            <dispatcher>
                <option name="default_view">items</option>
            </dispatcher>
        </backend>
        
        <!-- Component front-end options -->
        <frontend>
            <!-- Dispatcher options -->
            <dispatcher>
                <option name="default_view">item</option>
            </dispatcher>
            <!-- Options common for all views -->
            <view name="*">
                <!-- Per-task ACL settings. The star task sets the default ACL privileges for all tasks. -->
                <acl>
                    <task name="*">false</task>
                </acl>
            </view>
            <view name="item">
                <!-- Task mapping -->
                <taskmap>
                    <task name="list">browse</task>
                </taskmap>
                <!-- Per-task ACL settings. An empty string removes ACL checks. -->
                <acl>
                    <!-- Everyone, including guests, can access dosomething -->
                    <task name="dosomething"></task>
                    <!-- Only people with the core.manage privilege can access the somethingelse task -->
                    <task name="somethingelse">core.manage</task>
                </acl>
            </view>
        </frontend>
    </fof>

The `fof.xml` file has an `<fof>` root element. Inside it you can have
zero or one tags called `<frontend>`, `<backend>` and `<cli>` which
configure FOF for front-end, back-end and CLI access respectively.
Please note that the CLI is a special case: it will mix both the
back-end and CLI settings to derive the final configuration. In the
other two cases (front- or back-end access) only the configuration for
this specific mode of access will be used.

### Dispatcher settings

You can configure the way the Dispatcher works using the `<dispatcher>`
tag. Inside it you can have one or more `<option>` tags. The name
attribute defines the name of the configuration variable to set, while
the tag's content defines the value of this configuration variable.

The available variables are:

default\_view
:   Defines the default view to show if none is defined in the input
    data. By default this is `cpanel`. In the example above we set it to
    items in the back-end and item in the front-end.

### View settings

There are several options that are applied per view. In the context of
the `fof.xml` file, a “view” actually refers to an MVC triad, not just
the View part of the triad. In so many words, the options affect the
Controller, Model and View used to render this particular component
view. You define the view the options apply to using the `name`
attribute of the view tag.

The settings of each view are isolated from the settings of every other
view, with one notable exception: the star view, i.e. `name="*"`. This
is a placeholder view that defines the default settings. These settings
are applied to all views. If you also have a view tag for a view, the
default settings (from the star view) and the settings for the
particular view are merged together. This applies to all settings
described below.

#### Task map settings

The task map settings allow you to map specific tasks to specific
Controller methods. Other frameworks would call this the “routing”
feature. It works the same way as adding running `registerTask` in your
specialized Controller class.

The task map is enclosed inside a single `<taskmap>` tag. You can have
exactly zero or one `<taskmap>` tags inside each view tag.

Inside the `<taskmap>` tag you can have one or more `<task>` tags. The
`name` attribute defines the name of the task to map, whereas the
content of the tag defines the controller’s method which will be called
for this task.

#### ACL settings

The ACL settings can be used to override or fine-tune the access control
for each task of the particular view. Even though FOF comes with default
ACL mappings for its basic tasks, these are not always sufficient or
appropriate for all situations. Normally this is achieved by overriding
the `onBefore` methods in the Controller, e.g. `onBeforeSave` to set up
the ACL checks for the save task. You can use the ACL mappings in the
`fof.xml` instead of such checks. You can even use the ACL mapping in
`fof.xml` for custom tasks for which no `onBefore` method exists.

The ACL settings are enclosed inside a single `<acl>` tag. You can have
exactly zero or one `<acl>` tags inside each view tag.

Inside the `<acl>` tag you can have one or more `<task>` tags. The name
attribute defines the name of the task to apply the access control,
whereas the content of the tag defines the Joomla! ACL privilege
required to access this task. You can use any core ACL privilege or any
custom ACL privilege defined in your component's `access.xml` file. If
you leave the content blank then no ACL check is performed (the task is
always accessible by all users). If you use the special value false then
the ACL privilege is always going to fail, i.e. the task will not be
accessible by any user.

#### Option settings

The `<option>` tag can be used to set up a setting of this View. It is
equivalent to passing a value in the `$config` array. The `name`
attribute defines the name of the configuration setting you want to
modify. The content of the tag is the value of this setting.

The configuration settings
--------------------------

The following settings can be used either in the `$config` array passed
to a Dispatcher, Controller, Model or View class or in the `fof.xml`
file’s `<option>` tags inside the `<view>` tags.

autoRouting
:   A bit mask which defines the automatic URL routing of redirections.
    A value of 1 means that front-end redirections will be put through
    Joomla!’s JRoute::\_(). A value of 2 means that back-end
    redirections will be put through Joomla!’s JRoute::\_(). You can
    combine multiple values by adding them together.

base\_path
:   The base path of the component.

    In \$config: Specify the absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the site’s root.

cacheableTasks
:   A comma separated list of tasks which support Joomla!’s caching.

cid
:   Define a comma separated list of item IDs to limit the view on.
    Normally this is empty. Only use when you want to limit a view to
    very specific items. Only valid in the `fof.xml` file.

csrf\_protection
:   Should we be doing a token check for the tasks of this view? The
    possible values are:

    -   0 - no token checks are performed

    -   1 - token checks are always performed

    -   2 - token checks are always performed in the back-end and in in
        the front-end, but only when the request format is 'html'
        (default setting)

    -   3 - token checks are performer only in the back-end

default\_task
:   The task to execute if none is defined. The default value is
    `display`.

event\_after\_delete
:   The content plugin event to trigger after deleting the data.
    Default: onContentAfterDelete

event\_after\_save
:   The content plugin event to trigger after saving the data. Default:
    onContentAfterSave

event\_before\_delete
:   The content plugin event to trigger before deleting the data.
    Default: onContentBeforeDelete

event\_before\_save
:   The content plugin event to trigger before saving the data. Default:
    onContentBeforeSave

event\_change\_state
:   The content plugin event to trigger after changing the published
    state of the data. Default: onContentChangeState

event\_clean\_cache
:   The content plugin event to trigger when cleaning cache. There is no
    default value.

helper\_path
:   The path where the View will be looking for helper classes. By
    default it's the `helpers` directory inside your component's
    directory.

    In \$config: Specify an absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's directory.

id
:   Define an item ID to limit the view on. Normally this is empty. Only
    use when you want to limit a view to one single item. Only valid in
    the `fof.xml` file.

ignore\_request
:   Set to 1 to prevent the Model's populateState() method from running.
    By default the method is empty and does nothing, as the Model is
    supposed to be decoupled from the request information, having the
    Controller push state variables to it.

layout
:   The default layout to use for this view. This is normally determined
    automatically based on the task currently being executed.

model\_path
:   The path where the Controller will be looking for Model class files.
    By default it's the `models` directory of the component's directory.

    In \$config: Specify an absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's directory.

model\_prefix
:   The naming prefix for the Model to be loaded by the Controller. The
    default option is `Model` where Componentname is the name of the
    component without the com\_ prefix.

modelName
:   The name of the Model class to load. Automatically defined based on
    the component and view names.

searchpath
:   The path where Controller classes will be searched for. By default
    it's the `controllers` directory inside your component's directory.

    In \$config: Specify the absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's root
    directory.

table\_path
:   The path where the Model will be looking for table classes. By
    default it's the `tables` directory inside your component's
    directory.

    In \$config: Specify an absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's directory.

table
:   Set the name of the table class the Model will use. Please note that
    the the component name is added to this name automatically. For
    example, given a component com\_example and a table setting of
    `foobar` the actual table class which will be used will be
    `ExampleTableFoobar`.

tbl
:   The name of the database table to use in the table class of this
    view. It is in the format of \#\_\_tablename, e.g.
    \#\_\_example\_items

tbl\_key
:   The name of the key field of the database table to use in the table
    class of this view. It is in the format of component\_view\_id, e.g.
    example\_item\_id.

template\_path
:   The path where the View will be looking for view template (.php) or
    form (.xml) files. By default it's the `tmpl` directory inside the
    current view's directory.

    In \$config: Specify an absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's directory.

view\_path
:   The path where the Controller will be looking for View class files.
    By default it's the `views` directory inside your component's
    directory.

    In \$config: Specify an absolute path.

    In fof.xml: Specify a path relative to the component's directory.

viewName
:   The name of the View class to load. Automatically defined based on
    the component and view names.

GNU Free Documentation License
==============================

Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 51
Franklin St , Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA . Everyone is
permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license
document, but changing it is not allowed.

**0. PREAMBLE**

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure
everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or
without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works
of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license
designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free program
should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software
does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be
used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is
published as a printed book. We recommend this License principally for
works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

**1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS**

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be
distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a
world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that
work under the conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers
to any such manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and
is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you copy, modify or
distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that
says that the Document is released under this License. If a section does
not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be
designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant
Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections then
there are none.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may be at
most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the general
public, that is suitable for revising the document straightforwardly
with generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic
paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor,
and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic
translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text
formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose
markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent. An image format
is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy
that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII
without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML
using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML,
PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of
transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats
include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by
proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated
HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus
such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this
License requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats which
do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the
most prominent appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning
of the body of the text.

A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose
title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following
text that translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ stands for a
specific section name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of
such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a
section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which
states that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty
Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this License,
but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that
these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on the
meaning of this License.

**2. VERBATIM COPYING**

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies to
the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying
of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

**3. COPYING IN QUANTITY**

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have
printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back
cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the
publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title
with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may add
other material on the covers in addition. Copying with changes limited
to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and
satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other
respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a
computer-network location from which the general network-using public
has access to download using public-standard network protocols a
complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If
you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when
you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

**4. MODIFICATIONS**

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the
Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version
filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and
modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

A.  Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
    from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
    (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
    of the Document). You may use the same title as a previous version
    if the original publisher of that version gives permission.

B.  List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
    responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
    Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
    Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five),
    unless they release you from this requirement.

C.  State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified
    Version, as the publisher.

D.  Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

E.  Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent
    to the other copyright notices.

F.  Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
    giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
    terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

G.  Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
    and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

H.  Include an unaltered copy of this License.

I.  Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add
    to it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
    publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If
    there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one
    stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
    given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
    Version as stated in the previous sentence.

J.  Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
    public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
    the network locations given in the Document for previous versions it
    was based on. These may be placed in the "History" section. You may
    omit a network location for a work that was published at least four
    years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of
    the version it refers to gives permission.

K.  For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
    Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all
    the substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
    and/or dedications given therein.

L.  Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in
    their text and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent
    are not considered part of the section titles.

M.  Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not
    be included in the Modified Version.

N.  Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or
    to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

O.  Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices
that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from
the Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these
sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of
Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice. These
titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover
Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements
made by) any one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text
for the same cover, previously added by you or by arrangement made by
the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another;
but you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the
previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

**5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS**

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license
notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding
at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or
publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the
same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections
in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in
the various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History";
likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any
sections Entitled "Dedications". You must delete all sections Entitled
"Endorsements".

**6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS**

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

**7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS**

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting
from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the
compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit. When the
Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply to the
other works in the aggregate which are not themselves derivative works
of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies
of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of the
entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers
that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic
equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise
they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.

**8. TRANSLATION**

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing
Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission from
their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all
Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these
Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and
all the license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers,
provided that you also include the original English version of this
License and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers. In
case of a disagreement between the translation and the original version
of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements",
"Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its
Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual title.

**9. TERMINATION**

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy,
modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License. However, parties
who have received copies, or rights, from you under this License will
not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in
full compliance.

**10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE**

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the
GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns. See <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/> .

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If
the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.

**ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents**

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and license
notices just after the title page:

> Copyright (C) YEAR YOUR NAME.
>
> Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
> under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
> any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
> Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A
> copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free
> Documentation License".

If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts,
replace the "with...Texts." line with this:

> with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
> Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being
> LIST.

If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free
software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit
their use in free software.
